[MUSIC PLAYING]
Tonight, President Biden warns of a bloody destructive war
in Ukraine as he announces there's now
150,000 Russian troops surrounding the country.
The president vows to give diplomacy
every chance as he says there's no proof Vladimir Putin is
pulling back his forces.
And he is warning tonight for the Russian president
if he goes further west.
An attack against one NATO country
is an attack against all of us.
Plus, was a cyber attack today in Ukraine a signal
that an invasion is about to begin?
Pain at the pump, our reporting tonight,
gas prices already rising across America.
Sandy Hook settlement, the landmark agreement as gun maker
Remington agrees to pay $73 million
to nine families of the elementary school massacre.
We know that this isn't going to stop gun violence,
but we know that we are sending a message to gun companies.
Royal sex abuse lawsuit, the new details tonight
on the out-of-court settlement between Prince Andrew
and Virginia Giuffre, who said she was raped by Queen
Elizabeth's second son.
Olympic doping outrage, the Russian ice skater
places first what other drugs were found
in the 15-year-old system.
Missing girl miracle, tonight, how
police found a missing six-year-old girl
in a secret room under a staircase.
And the classical musicians working to erase
the stigma of mental health.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is the CBS Evening News with Norah O'Donnell reporting
from the nation's capital.
Good evening to our viewers in the West.
And thank you for joining us.
We want to begin with what is the biggest security
crisis between the West and Russia
since the end of the Cold War.
In his first address, specifically
about the tensions, President Biden today
revealed a new number of Russian troops now encircling Ukraine--
150,000 soldiers.
The president says the US stands prepared to respond,
and that an invasion by Putin would rally the world
to oppose its aggression.
A US official tells CBN News that Russia
moved rocket launchers and long-range artillery
into firing positions yesterday.
Earlier today, the websites of Ukraine's defense ministry,
armed forces, and two state-owned banks
were brought down by a cyber attack.
Ukraine's government released a statement suggesting Russians
were the perpetrators.
And experts have long said electronic warfare could
be a precursor to invasion.
CBS's Charlie D'Agata is on the ground in Ukraine.
But we're going to start with CBS's Ed O'Keefe
at the White House.
Good evening, Ed.
Good evening, Norah.
There is deep skepticism here at the White House
about that purported Russian troop pullback.
The president warns an invasion of Ukraine is still possible.
But he had a message today for the Russian leader.
Give peace a chance.
President Biden said today he isn't convinced
Vladimir Putin is pulling back Russian troops
from the Ukrainian border.
That would be good, but we have not yet verified that.
Indeed, our analysts indicate that they remain very much
in a threatening position.
Russian state media today showed what
appeared to be some Russian tanks retreating.
Putin announced he had decided to partially pull back troops.
But a US official called the apparent withdrawal
a smokescreen.
And the president revealed there are now 150,000 Russian troops
encircling Ukraine, up from 130,000.
An invasion remains distinctly possible.
[SPEAKING RUSSIAN]
The president's comments came hours
after Putin, meeting in Moscow with the German chancellor,
said he didn't want war, and that he
wanted to solve the issue as part of a negotiation process
through peaceful means.
We should give the diplomacy every chance to succeed.
President Biden said diplomacy was still the preferred option.
But he made clear that Putin's demand
that Ukraine never become a member of NATO
is off the table.
He also had a warning for Putin.
Though I've been clear that if Russia
targets Americans in Ukraine, we will respond forcefully.
Mr. Biden's speech today is his first on the crisis
amid weeks of diplomatic talks, including
a call today with the French president
and the deployment of thousands of US troops to NATO
countries in Eastern Europe.
Members of the 82nd Airborne left for Poland today.
But the president made a point of explicitly stating the US
and NATO a threat to Russia.
We're not targeting the people of Russia.
We do not seek to destabilize Russia.
To the citizens of Russia, you are not our enemy.
Now despite Putin's claims that he's pulling back
troops in the hopes for broader diplomatic talks,
US officials tell CBS News an invasion of Ukraine by Russia
could still occur later this week.
Norah.
Ed O'Keefe at the White House, thanks.
The secretary of defense will head to Poland this week
to meet US troops in the NATO country.
And that's where the US has deployed 5,000 service members
in hopes of hardening the alliance's eastern flank.
It's out of concern that Russia could steamroll through Ukraine
and move to take the former Soviet Republic of Moldova.
That would put Vladimir Putin on the doorstep of NATO.
And as President Biden said today, attacking one NATO
country is attacking them all.
CBS's Charlie D'Agata is in Lviv, Ukraine,
near Poland's border and the new temporary home of the US
embassy.
Good evening, Charlie.
Norah, the president's address came
a bit late for any official reaction here.
Ukrainians will be hopeful the US is open to negotiations
but realistically more fearful of what may come.
The Russian threat still has Ukraine
skeptical and on edge tonight.
The foreign minister saying we believe in a de-escalation
when we see a full scale pullout.
Despite Russian reassurances, US officials
tell CBS News those troops pulling back to their barracks
are not frontline forces, describing them as irrelevant.
And they represent just a fraction
of the rest of the 150,000 troops,
missiles, and warships that remain
in place by land and sea.
Critically, that includes Russian troops
on joint military exercises in Belarus
just a few miles from the capital Kiev.
A US official tells CBS News that Russian forces have
moved into attack positions.
And Americans have been told to leave immediately.
It's unclear how many of the thousands of US citizens
living in Ukraine still remain here.
Some like Keith Morrison have sought safer refuge
here in Lviv but no plans to cross the Polish border.
A full-scale invasion?
I mean, yeah, sure.
If troops are coming to Lviv, that would definitely
influence our decision.
Now there was that major cyber attack
that you mentioned earlier tonight.
It shut down the websites of the ministry of defense
and a couple of major banks.
Everything was up and running in a couple of hours.
People that we spoke to said it was probably
something to test the system.
Norah.
Charlie D'Agata in Lviv, thank you.
Well, tonight, President Biden warns
that harsh sanctions on Russia could have significant blowback
on the US economy, including possible price
hikes and disruption to the nation's energy supply.
A gallon of gas is now about $1 more than it was a year ago.
And we get more from CBS's Omar Villafranca.
Filling up your gas tank can empty your wallet.
California has some of the highest prices,
an average of $4.71 a gallon.
This station near downtown LA was well over $6.
Holy mackerel.
I couldn't believe it.
It was crazy.
Texas has some of the cheapest prices in the country,
an average of $3.18 a gallon.
But that's no relief to Eduardo Martinez,
who drives more than 100 miles a day
hauling construction debris.
How often are you having to fill up?
Maybe like once-- once or twice a day.
Yeah.
How much is it to fill your tank up?
Well over $100.
It looks like we're in for higher oil and gasoline
prices for the long haul.
Ed Hirs is an energy fellow at the University of Houston
and says despite the president releasing 50 million barrels
of oil from the Strategic Reserve to help consumers,
it's just a drop in the bucket on the global market.
Hirs says if oil-rich Russia invades Ukraine,
American consumers will feel the ripple effect at the pump.
Expect to see the price go up by another $0.50 to $0.75 a gallon
if Russia goes ahead with an invasion of Ukraine.
President Biden says he will work with Congress to protect
consumers at the pump.
Senate Democrats are considering a federal gas tax holiday
which would last the rest of the year
and could save consumers up to $0.18 a gallon.
But it's too early to tell if the bill has enough support.
Norah.
Omar Villafranca, thanks.
Tonight, in an historic settlement,
a gun manufacturer for the first time
is being held liable for a mass shooting.
Nearly 10 years after 20 first graders and six educators
were killed at Sandy Hook Elementary.
The families of nine victims have reached a $73 million
settlement with Remington, the maker of the rifle used
in the attack.
We get more now from CBS's Nikki Battiste.
I'm very hopeful that this creates precedent.
After the murder of her six-year-old son
Dylan at Sandy Hook Elementary School,
Nikole Hockley fought for change.
She's among nine victims' families
who took on Remington, manufacturers
of the semi-automatic AR-15 style
rifle used in the massacre.
They will tell you this is made for hunting.
But where's the animal?
Where's the animal in this?
Attorneys representing the families
were able to navigate around a federal law designed
to protect gun companies from litigation,
arguing that Remington chose profit over safety
and deliberately marketed the AR-15 to troubled young men.
I know that the headlines today are
going to be a lot about the $73 million.
That is just not really on my radar.
It's more about the process of what we can now
do with what we've discovered and how we can share that
to everyone else.
Back in December 2012, the 20-year-old gunman
entered the school and began a shooting rampage,
killing 20 first graders and six teachers
before taking his own life.
Vicki was an incredible person.
Jillian and Matthew Soto are siblings
of 27-year-old Victoria Soto, a teacher who died
trying to protect her students.
Why was it important for your family
to be a part of this lawsuit against Remington?
We are sending a message to gun companies
and to insurance companies that your products are dangerous.
And you can be held liable for the deaths that
come from these products.
It gives us hope that people are going
to remember who died at Sandy Hook, who Vicki is,
and the fight that these families have put up
to see this not happen again.
Remington, which has now filed for bankruptcy twice,
has not responded to CBS News request for comment.
Lawyers for the nine Sandy Hook families
say the gunmaker did agree to make
all of its marketing materials public as a part
of the settlement.
Norah.
Nikki Battiste, thank you.
Now to a major development in the sex abuse scandal
that has shaken the royal family,
Britain's Prince Andrew has agreed
to settle a lawsuit filed by a woman who says she was sexually
trafficked to the British royal by Jeffrey Epstein when
she was just 17.
CBS's Ian Lee is in London with more.
Prince Andrew's legal battle with Virginia Giuffre
ended today when the two reached a financial settlement
for an undisclosed amount.
A statement filed in a New York court
said, "Andrew accepts that Giuffre suffered
both as an established victim of abuse
and as a result of unfair public attacks."
How much pressure was Prince Andrew
under by the royal family to settle?
Everyone in the royal family was obviously
very keen to avert a full-blown trial.
The settlement comes just weeks before the Queen's second son
was set to be deposed under oath.
There is no doubt in my mind that the possibility of his
being dismantled piece by piece, question by question,
and his character being shattered
to pieces during the course of a deposition, those
are the reasons that Prince Andrew would settle
At the heart of the case is Giuffre's accusation
that convicted sex offender, the late Jeffrey Epstein,
trafficked her to the prince in the early 2000s
when she was just a teenager and says she was raped by Andrew,
a charge the prince denies.
I have no recollection of ever meeting this lady.
Is Prince Andrew's settlement an admission of guilt?
Prince Andrew's settlement is clearly not an admission
of guilt on his part.
And it was drafted specifically that way.
Andrew acknowledged Epstein's trafficking of young girls
and says he now regrets his association with him,
adding that he'll also be making a donation to Giuffre's
charity.
Norah, Buckingham Palace has declined to comment.
But the deal avoids further potential embarrassment
for the royal family as the Queen celebrates
70 years on the throne.
Ian Lee in London, thanks.
Well, a jury today ruled against former Alaska governor Sarah
Palin in her libel suit with The New York Times.
The jurors in a federal court rejected her claim
that the paper maliciously damaged her reputation
by falsely linking her campaign rhetoric to a mass shooting.
A judge had already declared that if the jury sided
with Palin, he would set aside its verdict on the grounds
that she hadn't proved that the paper acted maliciously.
Let's turn now to the Olympics where the Russian doping
scandal remains the biggest topic of conversation.
Russia's 15-year-old skating sensation returned to the ice
today with a powerful performance.
But it did little to quiet the criticism
over her failed drug test.
CBS's Jamie Yuccas is in Beijing with the latest.
After days of drama off the ice, Russian star Kamila Valieva
returned to the competition, stumbling
while attempting her first triple Axel
but quickly recovered skating into the lead heading
into the finals of the women's individual program.
Valieva has been under a cloud of suspicion
after failing a drug test in December.
She was cleared to compete in the Olympics.
But the IOC said there will be no medal
ceremony until the doping charges against her
are resolved.
I thought she handled it with a lot of grace.
Stephanie Apstein of Sports Illustrated
watched Valieva from inside the arena.
I was watching it behind the heads of the skaters who
were saying that they believe in clean sports,
and that doping is wrong.
And I think it was another reminder for me
of how this isn't really about the skating at all anymore.
It's about whether she should be there.
Olympic officials said today Valieva
blamed her positive test on a mix up
with her grandfather's heart medication.
Results on a second sample are pending.
In her first public comments since the scandal broke,
Valieva told a Russian state broadcaster,
"these days have been very difficult for me.
I'm happy but I'm tired emotionally."
Tonight, The New York Times is reporting that Valieva's tests
found evidence of two other heart medications
not on the banned list.
One anti-doping official though said the presence of all three
of those drugs in an athlete the age of Valieva
is highly unusual.
Norah.
And puzzling.
Jamie Yuccas in Beijing, thanks.
Well, a frightening moment aboard an American Airlines
flight right before takeoff today.
The plane was on the tarmac at New York's JFK airport
heading to Phoenix when two tires blew out.
And the pilot had to suddenly abort takeoff.
No one was hurt.
All 142 passengers on board had to reschedule
for a later flight.
And still ahead right here on tonight's CBS Evening News,
Alec Baldwin is hit with a lawsuit
over that deadly accidental shooting
on the set of his movie.
Police in upstate New York have found a young girl
reported missing in 2019.
The six-year-old was discovered in a secret room hidden
under a staircase in the home where her biological parents
were living.
Police credit an eagle-eyed detective
who noticed an odd section of the staircase that appeared out
of place, and they spotted a blanket.
Actor Alec Baldwin was sued today
by the family of the cinematographer he accidentally
shot and killed on the set of his western Rust.
A lawyer for the family of Halyna Hutchins
blames her death on, quote, "reckless conduct
and cost-cutting measures by Baldwin and other producers."
Baldwin claims he never pulled the trigger.
Well, there's big news tonight from our parent company.
ViacomCBS will be known as Paramount starting Wednesday.
CBS, one of the founding names in broadcasting
for nearly a century, will remain the same.
The company announced the rebranding today
while also revealing that its streaming platform Paramount
Plus and Showtime topped 56 million subscribers
at the end of 2021.
And coming up next, meet the orchestra
hoping to erase the stigma of mental illness one note
at a time.
If you can't watch the CBS Evening News, you can listen.
Subscribe wherever you get your podcasts.
Sponsored by Principal Financial Group.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Studies have long found that listening to music
benefits our mental health.
CBS's Nancy Chen highlights an orchestra
where the musicians themselves are the ones benefiting.
[ORCHESTRA MUSIC PLAYING]
There have been plenty of high and low notes
for those on stage here at Boston's storied Symphony Hall.
But when these musicians perform together,
there is simply harmony.
What does music bring to your life?
Music brings to my life everything.
Ronald Brownstein was once a music director at Julliard
and conducted around the world.
I was able to learn and memorize complete symphonies overnight.
But then the award-winning conductor
was diagnosed with bipolar disorder,
which he says cost him work.
It was a constant up and down.
I just want an orchestra of people like me.
Along with his wife, Brownstein started the Me2/Orchestra
for people with mental illness and those who support them,
musicians like Josh Santana.
What have you found with the orchestra?
Playing music is so powerful when you are all
joined by a common mission.
The New England-based orchestra has inspired ensembles around
the country, all with the same focus--
ending the stigma.
We aren't trying to be the greatest
orchestra in the world.
We are just trying to create a community.
[ORCHESTRA MUSIC PLAYING]
A community orchestrating inclusion and appreciation.
Nancy Chen, CBS News.
Perfect.
We'll be right back.
This portion of the CBS Evening News is sponsored by Farxiga.
Tomorrow, a CBS News investigation
of why claims from sick veterans exposed to contaminated
drinking water at a North Carolina military base
are being denied.
Well, that's tonight's CBS Evening News.
Good night.